---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/note/the-empiricist-case-for-the-action-axiom/","tags":["praxeology"],"noteIcon":""}
---

<head>
  <title>The Empiricist Case for the Action Axiom</title>
  <meta property="og:title" content="The Empiricist Case for the Action Axiom" />
  <meta property="og:type" content="article" />
  <meta property="og:image" content="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/geeslime/img/main/atlasdoodle.png" />
  <meta property="og:image:secure_url" content="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/geeslime/img/main/atlasdoodle.png" />
  <meta property="og:image:type" content="image/jpeg" />
  <meta property="og:image:width" content="688" />
  <meta property="og:image:height" content="419" />
  <meta property="og:description" content="The action axiom refers to the proposition, human action is purposeful behavior. What is necessary to ground economic explanations is the recognition of the purposeful character of human action. The purposeful character of human action results from the very nature of human beings. Praxeology does not consider what might be the motives for taking an action or whether the end of an action is choice-worthy. Rather, it simply focuses on the formal relations between ends and means." />
  <meta property="og:locale" content="en_US" />
  <meta property="og:url" content="https://gulch.vercel.app/note/the-empiricist-case-for-the-action-axiom/" />
  <meta property="og:site_name" content="gulch" />
</head>



The action axiom refers to the [[note/Proposition\|proposition]], "*human action is purposeful behavior.*" [[Praxeology as the Correct Method for Studying Economics\|What is necessary to ground economic explanations is the recognition of the purposeful character of human action]]. The purposeful character of [[note/Human Action\|human action]] results from *the very nature of human beings*. [[note/Praxeology\|Praxeology]] does not consider what might be the motives for taking an action or whether the end of an action is choice-worthy. Rather, it simply focuses on [[note/The Four Causes (BPC)\|the formal relations between ends and means]]. The notion of *homo agens*(acting man) as developed in [[note/Austrian Economics\|Austrian economics]] should replace *homo economicus*(economic man) as the foundation for [[note/Economics\|economic theorizing]].

Human action is [[G1/Fundamentality\|fundamental]] to [[note/Epistemology\|epistemology]]. For [[note/Man\|man]] to gain [[G1/Knowledge\|knowledge]], [[note/Consciousness is an Active Process\|he must act]]—perform some compulsion [[note/Mental Focus\|by his will]] to [[note/Sense Perception\|observe]] and [[note/The Objectivist Theory of Concepts\|integrate concepts]]. Human action can be [[note/Validation\|validated]] by the same means that [[note/The Fundamental Axioms of Metaphysics\|the axioms of metaphysics]] are validated: Man observes that [[note/Existence Exists\|for things to exist, they must exist]], man observes that [[note/The Axiom of Consciousness\|he is aware of the fact that things exist]], and man observes that [[note/The Law of Identity\|things are what they are]]. Mises notes: [[G2/MAN, UNEASINESS, & REASON\|Axiomatically man acts to alleviate some form of unease]], this is all correct. However, theoretical logical [[Deduction\|deductions]] that both [[Ludwig Von Mises\|Mises]] and [[Hans-Hermann Hoppe\|Hoppe]] use to get to this conclusion are all *unnecessary* and lack a key component. To *talk* about human action is to *know* human action, to *know* about human action means to have [[note/The Objectivist Theory of Concept Formation as Valid\|gained it by some means]] (the senses). Since [[note/All Knowledge is Either Perceptual or Conceptual\|all knowledge comes from integrating concepts via the data given by the senses]], *to know about human action means to have observed human action in some way*. 

The claim that human action is *purposeful* is neither merely an empirical [[note/Generalization\|generalization]] nor simply a [[G1/Tautology\|tautology]]. "*Human action is purposeful*" is an axiomatic—[[G1/The Necessary-Contingent False Dichotomy\|necessary]]—[[[[Truth\|true]] proposition. 

1. It is a [[note/Self-Evident vs. Obvious\|self-evident]] primordial [[note/Fact\|fact]] that [[G2/ppp/Methodological Individualism\|individuals]] engage in [[note/Free Will\|conscious actions]] toward [[Ends and Values\|chosen goals]].
2. The action axiom is *defended*, *not [[note/Proof\|proved]]*, via negative demonstration—[[note/Human Action is Undeniable\|a dialectical argument]] in a manner similar to [[note/Axioms as Undeniable\|what Aristotle used in defending the principle of non-contradiction]]. It is used [[note/Human Action is Undeniable\|against any would-be denier of the action axiom]].
3. Apparent in this defense is the [[note/Refute\|self-refuting]] character of the attempt to deny the action axiom(because that is an action).

However we still need to answer, (a) *what grounds its necessity—that is, what makes it a necessary truth?* And, (b) *why is this type of action necessary to being human?* **The action axiom is a necessary truth because acting purposively is an essential expression of human nature**. The action axiom is grounded in the very nature of human beings as volitional, rational entities. This is a necessary truth because it is a fundamental aspect of human existence, similar to the axioms of existence and consciousness. In [[note/The Pre-Requisites of Epistemology\|Objectivist epistemology]], necessary truths are those that are inherent in the nature of reality and can be directly perceived or [[new 2/The Validity of Introspection\|introspected]]. Axioms, being self-evident, do not require proof but are validated through direct observation and introspection. *Human* action is [[note/Necessary Connections (BPC)\|necessarily]] purposeful because it *reflects* [[note/Characteristics vs. Properties (BPC)\|the distinctive characteristics of human beings and the aspects of their being]]. Humans by their nature, unlike [[G1/Inanimate vs. Living Entities\|inanimate objects]] or [[G1/Animal Consciousness\|lower animals]], possess the [[G2/ppp/Capacities and Capabilities\|capacity]] for [[note/Free Will\|volition]] (*the ability to choose*) and [[G1/Man's Capacity to Reason\|reason]] (*the ability to think and plan*). These capacities mean that human actions are guided by *intention*  and *purpose* aimed at achieving one's selected ends, [[note/Differentiation\|differentiating]] them from mere reflexive or involuntary movements. The necessity of the action axiom lies in its direct, perceptually self-evident, [[note/Validation\|validation]] through the observation of human behavior and introspection of one's own actions, *consistently demonstrating purposeful intent*. [^1]

Human action is an essential expression of human nature because *it is the means by which humans navigate reality and achieve their values*, and [[Means and Ends\|the means of human action only has value in so far that the ends are valued by the actor]]. Purposeful behavior involves engaging in goal-directed behavior **guided by reason**. Man is a rational animal, a being of volitional choice. [[G1/Early Perceptual Development\|Other animals may perform a primitive sort of logic and focus some of the time]], but for the most part, they need only rely on instincts. *Man has no choice but to make volitional choices or he will not survive*. Imagine a naked man trying to hunt with just his hands and teeth as weapons. The form of man's body and the use of his mind compared to other animals should be [[note/Evidence\|evidence]] enough to convince most people that human evolution favored *the tool of a rational mind* for survival over *primitive tools like claws and fangs*. Man's ability to have [[note/Mental Focus\|a selective mental focus]] that [[note/The Epistemic Role of Measurement\|separates certain aspects of reality from all others]] means *they're no longer requiring instincts*. The ability to observe an object is great, but the ability to choose to focus on an object, to [[note/Abstraction\|abstract out]] its attributes, and [[The Epistemology of Tool-Use\|to produce tools from those attributes to use in actions is even better]]. An ape can pick up a rock to throw at an opposing group to injure or scare them away. A man can pick up a rock, [[note/Conditioning Connections (BPC)\|abstract out the fragility of some of the minerals and the strengths of others]], and form a plan to produce spears from certain rocks. 

There is nothing [[note/Omnipotence\|supernatural]] about [[note/The Error of Mechanistic Causality\|a series of evolutionary events that led to cognitive choice]]. The only difference between man and animal is man's ability to abstract. [[note/Consciousness is an Active Process\|A life that can percieve reality, has to be able to act within that reality]]. Do you eat this or that? Do you go this way or that way? Do you hide here or there? Do you hunt for yourself or for others? Do you fight or do you run or do you freeze? *Existence provides choice, death forces choice, [[Finishedbaby/Causal-Genetic Method of Epilology\|evolution begins to revolve around choice]], and thus [[G2/ppp/A Theory of the Analogy Between Epilogical Phenomena and Natural Organisms\|choice is driven by survival]]*.

The [[G2/ppp/Capacities and Capabilities\|capacity for human action]] is the [[note/Conceptual Common Denominator\|essential characteristic]] of all men because it underpins every other aspect of human life. Every action we take, from brushing our teeth to choosing a career, involves a purpose. Even seemingly mundane actions have underlying goals, such as maintaining hygiene or earning a living. The [[G2/ppp/Capacities and Capabilities\|capacity]] for human action is what fundamentally differentiates humans from other entities. It's our ability to set goals and devise means to achieve them that underpins all human life. *This isn’t just a trait; it’s the bedrock of our existenc*e. The necessity of the action axiom lies in its reflection of the essential, irreducible aspects of human nature: volition and rationality. Purposeful behavior is not only an essential characteristic of human nature but it's a *requirement* for their existence. This axiom is a necessary truth because it describes a universal aspect of human life that is directly observable and introspectively undeniable. The action axiom reflects the inherent [[Teleology\|teleological]] nature of human beings—entities that must act to sustain their lives and achieve their goals. This is not something that needs proving because it’s apparent in every conscious moment of our lives. Human action is validated empirically because we observe and participate in it continuously. Even the process of denying purposeful action would itself be an action aimed at a purpose, thereby affirming the axiom's validity. [[note/The Locus of Human Free Will\|This purposeful behavior is genetically and causally linked to our rationality and volition]]. Correlating with the fact that man acts to alleviate a felt uneasiness, *meaning we act to achieve a state that we perceive as better than our current one*. This constant striving for [[individualistic perfectionism\|individualistic perfectionism]] is the necessary link, connecting [[G3/boob/Autistic vs. Inter-Personal Ethics\|autistic ethics]] to [[note/Law\|the metnormative typoloy of law]], which was first and foremost explicated by [[Murray N. Rothbard\|Rothbard]] in "*[[The Ethics of Liberty\|The Ethics of Liberty]].*"

> [...] Rothbard's understanding of the action axiom *does not* entail *non-cognitivism* in [[ethics\|ethics]] or [[G3/Zzz/coursee/Libertarianism\|political philosophy]]. [[G2/pilll/Value-Free Science\|Not to consider whether one's ends are choice-worthy]] is *not* equivalent to claiming that there is no basis for [[Ethics\|determining whether one's ends are choice-worthy]].
> 
> Further, since Rothbard was an advocate of [[G3/Zzz/coursee/Theory of Natural Law\|natural moral law]] and [[G3/poop/Property Rights\|natural rights]], he would argue that *homo agens* and *homo moralis* are complementary, *not* antagonistic accounts of human nature. In this regard, it is worth noting that for [[Saint Thomas Aquinas\|Aquinas]], the first principle of practical reasoning is "[[Rational Egoism\|good is to be done and pursued]] and [[G3/poop/Conflict Avoidance\|evil is to be avoided]]." This principle does not itself determine the basic goods and virtues of the self-perfecting life, but it does *express* the end-oriented character of human action. [^2]

Rothbard is [[note/Empiricism\|an empiricist about the source of knowledge]]. He does not think that [[note/The Epistemic Primacy of Sense Perception\|consulting sense experience]] precludes [[note/Fact\|grasping what is necessary and universal]]. As Rothbard states, "*I would deny as an [[people/Aristotle\|Aristotelian]] and neo-Thomist any such [[note/The Kantian Attack on Cognition\|alleged laws of logical structure that the human mind necessarily imposes on the chaotic structure of reality]]. Instead, I would call all such laws laws of reality which the mind apprehends from investigating and collating the facts of the real world.*" Rothbard's account of the action axiom is dependent not only on a view of sense perception but also on a view of [[note/The Objectivist Theory of Concepts\|conception]] and thus [[note/Abstraction\|abstraction]]. He states, "*My view is that the fundamental axiom and subsidiary axioms are derived from the experience of reality and are therefore in the broadest sense empirical. I would agree with the Aristotelian realist that its doctrine is radically empirical, [[note/The Conflation of Empiricism and Nominalism-Sensualism\|far more so than the post-Humean empiricism which is dominant in modern philosophy.]]*"

There are objections to this view of conception. See **part 2**—[[note/Addressing the Attacks on Abstraction In General and In the Study of Man In Particular\|Addressing the Attacks on Abstraction In General and In the Study of Man In Particular]]—of [[note/The Objectivist Case for the Validation of Praxeology\|this objectivist case for the validity of praxeology]].


[^1]: To a Misesian such as Rothbard, "rational" means the same thing as "purposeful," and we know that all human action indeed has a purpose. In this page i'm using "rational" in this sense, that is, *as a [[G2/ppp/Capacities and Capabilities\|capacity]] rather than an activity*. However, in a different sense of the word "rational," there are indeed many instances where men are not adhering to [[G1/Principles\|the principles of rationality]] or are even on [[note/The Primacy of Consciousness as the Fundamental Error\|an active crusade against rationality]]. This is a more [[people/Ayn Rand\|Rand]] sense of speaking about rationality, where reason is not an intrinsic attribute to all human action. Rather, it is a [[Thought\|deliberate identification and integration of percepts]] as opposed to [[note/Evasion\|a deliberate disintegration of the facts of reality]].
[^2]: [Rothbard’s Account of the Action Axiom](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aC0PnYd6peM&list=TLPQMjAwNzIwMjQONdtT0FRK1w&index=45&ab_channel=misesmedia)—[[Douglas Rasmussen\|Douglas Rasmussen]]



<body>
  </div>
  <!-- Disqus Comments Section -->
  <div id="disqus_thread"></div>
  <script>
      var disqus_config = function () {
          this.page.url = "https://gulch.vercel.app/note/the-empiricist-case-for-the-action-axiom/";  // Replace with your page's canonical URL variable
          this.page.identifier = "the-empiricist-case-for-the-action-axiom"; // Replace with your page's unique identifier variable
      };
      (function() {  // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
          var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
          s.src = 'https://https-gulch-vercel-app.disqus.com/embed.js';
          s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
          (d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
      })();
  </script>
  <noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
</body>